# 1.3 — Introduction to objects and variables

## 数据

在 [[1.1 Statements and the structure of a pogram]] 中，我们学习了组成一个程序所涉及的大多数语句并且将它们封装成了函数。这些语句能够执行一系列操作并按照（但愿）预期输出正确的结果。

但是，程序究竟是如何生成这些结果的呢？它们是通过操作（读、修改、写）数据来完成这一过程的。在计算机领域，数据指的是任何可以被计算机移动、处理和存储的信息。

>[!TIP] 关键信息
> 所谓程序，即一系列用于操作数据并输出预期结果的指令

一个程序可以通过多种途径来获取数据，例如通过文件、数据库、网络、用户输入来获取，程序员甚至可以直接将数据嵌入在程序源码中。在前面课程中编写的 “Hello world” 程序中，“Hello world”这个字符串便是直接嵌入在程序中的。随后，该程序对该数据进行操作，将其显示在显示器上。

Data on a computer is typically stored in a format that is efficient for storage or processing (and is thus not human readable). Thus, when the “Hello World” program is compiled, the text “Hello world!” is converted into a more efficient format for the program to use (binary, which we’ll discuss in a future lesson).

Objects and variables

All computers have memory, called RAM (short for random access memory), that is available for your programs to use. You can think of RAM as a series of numbered mailboxes that can each be used to hold a piece of data while the program is running. A single piece of data, stored in memory somewhere, is called a value.

In some older programming languages (like Apple Basic), you could directly access these mailboxes (a statement could say something like _go get the value stored in mailbox number 7532_).

In C++, direct memory access is not allowed. Instead, we access memory indirectly through an object. An object is a region of storage (usually memory) that has a value and other associated properties (that we’ll cover in future lessons). How the compiler and operating system work to assign memory to objects is beyond the scope of this lesson. But the key point here is that rather than say _go get the value stored in mailbox number 7532_, we can say, _go get the value stored by this object_. This means we can focus on using objects to store and retrieve values, and not have to worry about where in memory they’re actually being placed.

Objects can be named or unnamed (anonymous). A named object is called a variable, and the name of the object is called an identifier. In our programs, most of the objects we create and use will be variables.

Author’s note

In general programming, the term _object_ typically refers to a variable, data structure in memory, or function. In C++, the term _object_ has a narrower definition that excludes functions.

Variable instantiation

In order to create a variable, we use a special kind of declaration statement called a definition (we’ll clarify the difference between a declaration and definition later).

Here’s an example of defining a variable named x:

```cpp
int x; // define a variable named x, of type int
```

COPY

At compile time, when the compiler sees this statement, it makes a note to itself that we are defining a variable, giving it the name _x_, and that it is of type _int_ (more on types in a moment). From that point forward (with some limitations that we’ll talk about in a future lesson), whenever the compiler sees the identifier _x_, it will know that we’re referencing this variable.

When the program is run (called runtime), the variable will be instantiated. Instantiation is a fancy word that means the object will be created and assigned a memory address. Variables must be instantiated before they can be used to store values. For the sake of example, let’s say that variable _x_ is instantiated at memory location 140. Whenever the program uses variable x, it will access the value in memory location 140. An instantiated object is sometimes also called an instance.

Data types

So far, we’ve covered that variables are a named region of storage that can store a data value (how exactly data is stored is a topic for a future lesson). A data type (more commonly just called a type) tells the compiler what type of value (e.g. a number, a letter, text, etc…) the variable will store.

In the above example, our variable _x_ was given type _int_, which means variable x will represent an integer value. An integer is a number that can be written without a fractional component, such as 4, 27, 0, -2, or -12. For short, we can say that _x_ is an _integer variable_.

In C++, the type of a variable must be known at compile-time (when the program is compiled), and that type can not be changed without recompiling the program. This means an integer variable can only hold integer values. If you want to store some other kind of value, you’ll need to use a different variable.

Integers are just one of many types that C++ supports out of the box. For illustrative purposes, here’s another example of defining a variable using data type _double_:

```cpp
double width; // define a variable named width, of type double
```

COPY

C++ also allows you to create your own user-defined types. This is something we’ll do a lot of in future lessons, and it’s part of what makes C++ powerful.

For these introductory chapters, we’ll stick with integer variables because they are conceptually simple, but we’ll explore many of the other types C++ has to offer soon.

Defining multiple variables

It is possible to define multiple variables _of the same type_ in a single statement by separating the names with a comma. The following 2 snippets of code are effectively the same:

```cpp
int a;
int b;
```

COPY

is the same as:

```cpp
int a, b;
```

COPY

When defining multiple variables this way, there are two common mistakes that new programmers tend to make (neither serious, since the compiler will catch these and ask you to fix them):

The first mistake is giving each variable a type when defining variables in sequence.

```cpp
int a, int b; // wrong (compiler error)

int a, b; // correct
```

COPY

The second mistake is to try to define variables of different types in the same statement, which is not allowed. Variables of different types must be defined in separate statements.

```cpp
int a, double b; // wrong (compiler error)

int a; double b; // correct (but not recommended)

// correct and recommended (easier to read)
int a;
double b;
```

COPY

Best practice

Although the language allows you to do so, avoid defining multiple variables in a single statement (even if they are the same type). Instead, define each variable in a separate statement (and then use a single-line comment to document what it is used for).

Summary

In C++, we use variables to access memory. Variables have an identifier, a type, and a value (and some other attributes that aren’t relevant here). A variable’s type is used to determine how the value in memory should be interpreted.

In the next lesson, we’ll look at how to give values to our variables and how to actually use them.