# 1.4 — Variable assignment and initialization

在上一节课  [[1.3 对象和变量]] 中，我们介绍了如何定义一个变量。在这一节课中，我们会介绍如何为变量赋值并使用它存储的值。

首先回忆一下，下面这个代码片段中，我们在内存中为一个名为 x 的整型变量分配了内存，然后类似地，又创建了两个整型变量，分别叫做 y 和 z：

```cpp
int x; // define an integer variable named x
int y, z; // define two integer variables, named y and z
```

## 变量赋值

变量创建完毕后，你可以使用赋值运算符 `=` 为其赋值（在另外一个单独的语句中）。这个过程称为拷贝赋值（或）After a variable has been defined, you can give it a value (in a separate statement) using the _= operator_. This process is called copy assignment (or just assignment) for short.

```cpp
int width; // define an integer variable named width
width = 5; // copy assignment of value 5 into variable width

// variable width now has value 5
```

COPY

Copy assignment is named such because it copies the value on the right-hand side of the _= operator_ to the variable on the left-hand side of the operator. The _= operator_ is called the assignment operator.

Here’s an example where we use assignment twice:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
	int width;
	width = 5; // copy assignment of value 5 into variable width

	// variable width now has value 5

	width = 7; // change value stored in variable width to 7

	// variable width now has value 7

	return 0;
}
```

COPY

When we assign value 7 to variable _width_, the value 5 that was there previously is overwritten. Normal variables can only hold one value at a time.

Warning

One of the most common mistakes that new programmers make is to confuse the assignment operator (`=`) with the equality operator (`==`). Assignment (`=`) is used to assign a value to a variable. Equality (`==`) is used to test whether two operands are equal in value.

Initialization

One downside of assignment is that it requires at least two statements: one to define the variable, and one to assign the value.

These two steps can be combined. When a variable is defined, you can also provide an initial value for the variable at the same time. This is called initialization. The value used to initialize a variable is called an initializer.

Initialization in C++ is surprisingly complex, so we’ll present a simplified view here.

There are 4 basic ways to initialize variables in C++:

```cpp
int a; // no initializer
int b = 5; // initializer after equals sign
int c( 6 ); // initializer in parenthesis
int d { 7 }; // initializer in braces
```

COPY

You may see the above forms written with different spacing (e.g. `int d{7};`). Whether you use extra spaces for readability or not is a matter of personal preference.

Default initialization

When no initialization value is provided (such as for variable _a_ above), this is called default initialization. In most cases, default initialization leaves a variable with an indeterminate value. We’ll cover this case further in lesson ([1.6 -- Uninitialized variables and undefined behavior](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/uninitialized-variables-and-undefined-behavior/)).

Copy initialization

When an initializer is provided after an equals sign, this is called copy initialization. Copy initialization was inherited from the C language.

```cpp
int width = 5; // copy initialization of value 5 into variable width
```

COPY

Much like copy assignment, this copies the value on the right-hand side of the equals to the variable being created on the left-hand side.

For simple types like int, copy initialization is efficient. However, when types get more complex, copy initialization can be inefficient.

Direct initialization

When an initializer is provided inside parenthesis, this is called direct initialization.

```cpp
int width( 5 ); // direct initialization of value 5 into variable width
```

COPY

For simple data types (like int), copy and direct initialization are essentially the same. For more complicated types, direct initialization tends to be more efficient than copy initialization.

Brace initialization

Unfortunately, direct initialization can’t be used for all types of initialization (such as initializing an object with a list of data). To provide a more consistent initialization mechanism, there’s brace initialization (also called uniform initialization or list initialization) that uses curly braces.

Brace initialization comes in three forms:

```cpp
int width { 5 }; // direct brace initialization of value 5 into variable width (preferred)
int height = { 6 }; // copy brace initialization of value 6 into variable height
int depth {}; // value initialization (see next section)
```

COPY

Direct and copy brace initialization function almost identically, but the direct form is generally preferred.

Brace initialization has the added benefit of disallowing “narrowing” conversions. This means that if you try to use brace initialization to initialize a variable with a value it can not safely hold, the compiler will throw a warning or an error. For example:

```cpp
int width { 4.5 }; // error: not all double values fit into an int
```

COPY

In the above snippet, we’re trying to assign a number (4.5) that has a fractional part (the .5 part) to an integer variable (which can only hold numbers without fractional parts). Copy and direct initialization would drop the fractional part, resulting in initialization of value 4 into variable _width_. However, with brace initialization, this will cause the compiler to issue an error (which is generally a good thing, because losing data is rarely desired). Conversions that can be done without potential data loss are allowed.

Best practice

Favor initialization using braces whenever possible.

Q: C++ provides copy, direct, and brace initialization, and copy assignment. Is there a direct or brace assignment?

No, C++ does not support a direct or brace assignment syntax.

Value initialization and zero initialization

When a variable is initialized with empty braces, value initialization takes place. In most cases, value initialization will initialize the variable to zero (or empty, if that’s more appropriate for a given type). In such cases where zeroing occurs, this is called zero initialization.

```cpp
int width {}; // zero initialization to value 0
```

COPY

Q: When should I initialize with { 0 } vs {}?

Use an explicit initialization value if you’re actually using that value.

```cpp
int x { 0 }; // explicit initialization to value 0
std::cout << x; // we're using that zero value
```

COPY

Use value initialization if the value is temporary and will be replaced.

```cpp
int x {}; // value initialization
std::cin >> x; // we're immediately replacing that value
```

COPY

Initialize your variables

Initialize your variables upon creation. You may eventually find cases where you want to ignore this advice for a specific reason (e.g. a performance critical section of code that uses a lot of variables), and that’s okay, as long the choice is made deliberately.

For more discussion on this topic, Bjarne Stroustrup (creator of C++) and Herb Sutter (C++ expert) make this recommendation themselves [here](https://github.com/isocpp/CppCoreGuidelines/blob/master/CppCoreGuidelines.md#es20-always-initialize-an-object).

We explore what happens if you try to use a variable that doesn’t have a well-defined value in lesson [1.6 -- Uninitialized variables and undefined behavior](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/uninitialized-variables-and-undefined-behavior/).

Best practice

Initialize your variables upon creation.

Initializing multiple variables

In the last section, we noted that it is possible to define multiple variables _of the same type_ in a single statement by separating the names with a comma:

```cpp
int a, b;
```

COPY

We also noted that best practice is to avoid this syntax altogether. However, since you may encounter other code that uses this style, it’s still useful to talk a little bit more about it, if for no other reason than to reinforce some of the reasons you should be avoiding it.

You can initialize multiple variables defined on the same line:

```cpp
int a = 5, b = 6; // copy initialization
int c( 7 ), d( 8 ); // direct initialization
int e { 9 }, f { 10 }; // brace initialization (preferred)
```

COPY

Unfortunately, there’s a common pitfall here that can occur when the programmer mistakenly tries to initialize both variables by using one initialization statement:

```cpp
int a, b = 5; // wrong (a is not initialized!)

int a = 5, b = 5; // correct
```

COPY

In the top statement, variable “a” will be left uninitialized, and the compiler may or may not complain. If it doesn’t, this is a great way to have your program intermittently crash and produce sporadic results. We’ll talk more about what happens if you use uninitialized variables shortly.

The best way to remember that this is wrong is to consider the case of direct initialization or brace initialization:

```cpp
int a, b( 5 );
int c, d{ 5 };
```

COPY

This makes it seem a little more clear that the value 5 is only being used to initialize variable _b_ or _d_, not _a_ or _c_.